Cybersecurity Piscine

ft_otp

Summary: Nothing ever lasts forever...

Version: 1.00 


Contents
I Introduction 2
II Prologue 3
III Mandatory Part 4
IV Bonus Part 6
V Submission and peer-evaluation 7

Chapter I

Introduction

Passwords are one of the biggest headaches in computer security Users forget
them, share them, reuse them and choose them horribly bad. Furthermore, passwords
are sooner or later leaked in security breaches. One way to avoid this is to use one-time
passwords, based on timestamps, which expire after a few minutes and then become in-
valid. Whether you already use this system, or if you have never heard of it, it is quite
likely that one of your passwords has been compromised at some point in your life.

In this project, the aim is to implement a TOTP (Time-based One-Time Password)
system, which will be capable of generating ephemeral passwords from a master key.
It will be based on the RFC: https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc6238
, so
you could use it in your day to day. 



Chapter II

Prologue

The Silk Road stretched across the entire Asian continent, connecting China with Mongo-
lia, Persia, India, the Middle East, Turkey, Europe, and Africa. Despite the name, it was
not the valuable cloth that was primarily traded. Glass, leather, weapons or war machines
traveled the world, expanding industrial discoveries, printing techniques, gunpowder or
the compass.

Password, please? 



Chapter III

Mandatory Part

In the language of your choice, you have to implement a program that allows you to store
an initial password in file, and that is capable of generating a new one time password
every time it is requested.

You can use any library that facilitates the implementation of the algorithm, as long
as it doesn’t do the dirty work, i.e. using a TOTP library is strictly prohibited. Of
course, you can and should use a library or function that allows you to access system
time.

• The executable must be named ft_otp

• Your program must take arguments.

◦ -g: The program receives as argument a hexadecimal key of at least 64 char-
acters. The program stores this key safely in a file called ft_otp.key, which
is encrypted.

◦ -k: The program generates a new temporary password based on the key given
as argument and prints it on the standard output.

• Your program must use the HOTP algorithm (RFC 4226).

• The generated one-time password must be random and must always contain the
same format, i.e. 6 digits.

Below is an example of use:

$ echo -n "NEVER GONNA GIVE YOU UP" > key.txt
$ ./ft_otp -g key.txt
./ft_otp: error: key must be 64 hexadecimal characters.
$ [..]
$ cat key.hex | wc -c
64
$ ./ft_otp -g key.hex
Key was successfully saved in ft_otp.key.
$ ./ft_otp -k ft_otp.key
836492
$ sleep 60
$ ./ft_otp -k ft_otp.key
123518 



Cybersecurity Piscine ft_otp

You can check if your program is working properly by comparing generated passwords
with Oathtool or any tool of your choice.

oathtool –totp $(cat key.hex)

Please note that the reference software you choose will be used
during your evaluation. 



Chapter IV

Bonus Part

You can enhance your project with the following features:

• Creation of a QR code with seed generation.

• Creation of a graphic interface.

The bonus part will only be assessed if the mandatory part is
PERFECT. Perfect means the mandatory part has been integrally done
and works without malfunctioning. If you have not passed ALL the
mandatory requirements, your bonus part will not be evaluated at all. 



Chapter V

Submission and peer-evaluation

Turn in your assignment in your Git repository as usual. Only the work inside your
repository will be evaluated during the defense. Don’t hesitate to double check the
names of your folders and files to ensure they are correct. 



Introduction
Prologue
Mandatory Part
Bonus Part
Submission and peer-evaluation